How [[Data]] first is created and then utilised.
### 1. Creating Data
The ways to create data is plentiful, and data is constantly generated by all we do.
- I.e. data has a plethora of sources, see e.g. [[Data]]

### 2. Storing Data
When data has to be stored, it can do so in e.g. a structured or an unstructured way. 

Especially when utilising structured data, it is important to understand which data should be kept and which should be left out.

Many times we see data stored in [[Databases]]

***Metadata***:
When storing data we need data "around it", to explain what the data is (defines the context).
- Data should be identified of being a certain type. Text, Number, Date, Picture, Video

So we look at how detailed or abstract we want to store the data.
	- It's important to keep data abstract as this allows us to perform operations on it
- So data has to be:
	- Detailed enough (through data type, format etc) that facts can be recreated
	- Abstract enough that it leaves room for inference, interpretation, creativity and computations ( for example aggregations)


##### Purpose of Storing Data:
The purpose of storing data is to be able to access it:
- Timely (when we need it)
- Completely (no incomplete information)
- Correctly (free from errors)
- Continuously (if thousands of users are accessing the database they should all be able to perform what they need)

^ This is also what data storage software needs to fulfill. I.e. it has to facilitate operations on data i.e. add, remove, update, fetch

### 3. Sharing Data
- Databases are NEVER shared across organizations. BIG NO NO !!!!
- So instead they have to decide how the data will be shared:
	- Inter-Organizational and also intra-organizational, Machine to machine data sharing happens through globally accepted data standards.
- Human readability is important for data [[Validity]]. 
- Agreed formats are important for cost saving.
	- Build systems that can talk. i.e. Web [[API]].
- Different format have pros and cons with respect to:
	- Metadata compared to actual data transferred
	- Format’s built in ability to support data validation.
	- Compatibility with state of the art tools.

For data sharing, there are three globally accepted data sharing formats
- [[Delimited Text Files]]. Also known as csv files.
- [[Extensible Markup Language (XML)]]
- [[JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)]]

**Comparison of data sharing formats:**
- Flat File with Delimiter
	- Least meta data
	- Context is missing for example Object hierarchy
	- Data type is missing • Data validation is missing.
- XML and JSON
	- Provide moderate context. For example both have data types to some extent
	- Object hierarchies and relations exist but not enforced.
	- Moderate data validation. For example restricting types of data. XML can utilize DTD for validation

## Journey of Looking at Data as Data Scientist
1. What are types of data. (DataType) ([[Data Types (SQL)]])
	- For example String if data is textual and Number, Int, BigInt if data is numeric
	- Explicit or implicit data types depending on how data will be stored. What framework, RDBMS, NOSQL etc
	- How flexible a data storage format is about implicit data types.
2. What structure data should be used while computationally processing data. (Data Structures)
	- For example arrays, linked list, hash, tree …
3. What form data will take when data is stored and exchanged/shared.
	- For example Relational or NOSql database for storage
	- For example delimited files (CSV), XML, JSON for sharing

